Could you give us your full name and how you'd like to see it printed?
My name is Edward Maggs, usually known as Ed.
Do you use a little initial?
No.
And what's your formal position in that company?
I am in fact the managing director of Maggs Brothers, and I also run the modern literature department.
I see.
And you represent the fifth generation, is that correct?
I moved here in 1936 and started by a firm starting early 1850s by a man called Uriah Maggs who left his hometown of Midsummer Norton in Somerset where there's a great clutch of people with the name Maggs and came to London and set up a very modest bookshop
very close to Paddington Station, which reminds me of the way the Pakistanis cluster around Heathrow and the way the East End Jews and the Chinese clustered around the docks and clearly he didn't get very far from the force of arrival.
Excuse me.
Hi.
Okay.
And he set up a sort of general stationery and bookshop and then his sons
in the, I suppose, 1880s and 1890s when the rare book trade in London was really beginning to accelerate with the growth of American collectors and the gradual dispersal of the European libraries.
The firm really just sort of grew from there.
That was the beginnings of the modern rare book trade, I think.
You mentioned the dispersal of the libraries to the United States collections.
Well, this was the great trend of the period, I suppose, from the late 19th century through to, I suppose, the 60s and 70s.
It's only in the last 20 years that the trend's been reversed.
I would think that Europe have probably met importers of books from the States now.
Certainly at times in the last few years, Europe has been.
which is the great sales, the great book sales of the last 10 years have been in the States rather than here.
But have you noticed that there is this kind of swing back?
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
I mean, just that so many books are in the States now that, yeah, it can be a very good place to buy.
Did you find also that some of the more important collectors are over on this side of the Atlantic now as opposed to the...
We've never done a proper sort of geological analysis of our sales, but America must remain our biggest market.
Yeah.
And we'd probably go America, the rest of Europe, and Japan.
But you get, it's very difficult to generalise because you get massive distortions that we only have.
a handful of South American collectors, but they happen to be very, very big collectors and spend a lot of money.
So that would distort the figures.
What kinds of things did the South Americans collect, for instance?
Oh, yeah, various individual types.
It doesn't matter where an individual might be.
There might be a very strong interest in... That's right.
I mean, it's very international.
And we're dealing with people of culture here and education.
And for the most part, culture is an international thing.
Shakespeare is important to an Argentinian, as he is to an Englishman.
And the second largest collection of Shakespeare is in Tokyo, isn't it?
Yeah, that's right.
He just recently died, I guess.
He did, yeah.
Was he a customer here?
No, never bought directly from us, no.
He was, I mean, he only bought pretty much only through the Japanese trade.
It's beginning to open up a little bit and we find ourselves dealing more and more with Japanese people privately and Japanese institutions directly.
So the sort of stranglehold that the Japanese trade's had over it is beginning to
Is the building haunted, by the way?
No.
But that's an enduring story.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
And here includes the stories.
There's about three or four different stories about it, none of which support each other.
Just before I put on the tape recording, you had started to talk about something that sounded very interesting.
You were talking about how you gauge interest.
I don't know precisely what you're
developing collections to suit the whatever might be attached in terms of literary importance.
Well, I think when you talk about a bookseller developing collections, I don't think that many... It's very arguable how much we are a mouthpiece of a more general market and how much the activities of the book trade in general influence the market.
I mean, I don't...
I can't think of many customers who I directly advise, who I say, you should buy this.
This is a very good area to collect.
For the most part, I respond to customers.
And there are very few booksellers, I think, who could be set to really actively influence trends themselves.
So when I mentioned earlier about the relationship of literary fashion and collecting fashion,
It's really more in a way of interesting observations, seeing, if you look at the way a TV series or movie will affect the market, it's nowhere near as simple as you would think.
When Brideshead Revisited was a big hit on the TV.
There was no appreciable increase at that time in demand for Evelyn Wall, and Brideshead in particular.
That took two or three years to come through.
And we, in fact, saw the rogue in the rare book market, Enthusiasm for Jane Austen, was evident many years before the recent rash of movies and TV stuff.
And she's now played for the month in the film and telly trade, whereas, in fact, they've been the easiest books in the world to sell for the last ten years or more.
Extraordinary demand.
And so it may well be that the movie Enthusiasm is a reflection of a
you know, a proper literary enthusiasm.
I think we're experiencing the same thing on our side with Melissa Mayelfatt, you know, this is a tremendous research into the book.
Really?
And that's expressed in modern editions of books?
Absolutely, yeah.
And they found some of these old pseudonymous things that she wrote.
Oh, yeah.
They enjoyed a pretty good popularity.
but I think it's been fueled in part by, you know, tremendous interest on television.
But how much of your business would you say is wide and stuff?
20th century modern?
Well, in the terms of the whole business.
About 10%, something like that.
So the principal area continues to be
Well, what are our principal areas?
The travel books, incunabula, medieval manuscripts, early English literature, natural history books, military history, bibliography, and autographs and manuscripts in general.
The thing you've got to realise about the modern book trade, I mean the trade of modern books, is that in my area, 19th and 20th century English literature,
the number of books which are inherently worth more than, let's say, £5,000, very few.
I mean, you know, a dozen, a couple of dozen.
We're not talking about special copies of books, but books which inherently are that expensive.
Whereas if you look at an area like colour plate books, or important travel books, or Incunabula, there are many more expensive books, which is why the modern books is a relatively small part of all business.
Do you do much with...
institutional libraries for collection development?
Our firm for the longest time has tended to be, to concentrate more on the private collector rather than the institutional collector.
We've got good relations with many institutions and work with them and do business with them, but the main thrust is probably the private person.
Again, this notion of collection development is something which
Some dealers do manage to work closely enough with collectors and institutions that they will, in fact, guide the collection.
But that's unusual, that's very rare.
But for the most part, it's a much more demand-led sort of situation, where most librarians know exactly what they want,
and know exactly why they're buying it, and they come to you to find it.
And that it's exceptional for a bookseller to actually be guiding the development of the collection.
Not really.
No, I mean, if...
Again, without being specific, for the most part, people... I know dealers who have much closer relationships with their customers than the relationship you just mentioned, even.
But even then, it's very difficult telling someone you're going to buy this.
The enthusiasm comes from the customer first.
That's very important.
If you look at the great relationship, the great customer-dealer relationship was probably Ian Fleming and Percy Muir.
Which I write about in my book.
The whole thing in the mind of man thing.
And then again, the idea came from Fleming.
And it was his enthusiasm for it and his understanding of it that made it all work.
That's right.
No, just because Percy knew the book trade and was such a widely developed and intelligent person, he was able to interpret that well and helped him build it.
But I think what I said earlier, I am trying to put a sharper focus on the authority, the scholars, the people who really do understand collections as collections,
and how the bookseller, and the relationship you just mentioned, the viewer and the Fleming viewers, and how it did work to a very, you know, to create a marvelous, marvelous collection.
Yeah.
Indiana University, to that extent.
Well, that's right, and sort of, you know, probably signaled a sea change in collecting, but, you know, it was such a big landmark that it clearly did sort of influence tastes.
Can you think of any other...
Collections like that, they're not necessarily even in this building, but where there is that kind of a symbiotic relationship, where the bookseller does work.
Can you talk to Steve Weissman?
We'll make sure we talk to him about his poetry collector, his name I've forgotten, which is... That's one where, from what we'll understand, Steve's basically on a retainer.
I want to spend X thousand dollars a year and want to make the best collection of poetry I can.
They are the exception, those sort of collections.
I mean, am I right, John?
Or am I just reflecting my own lack of enterprise and success at guiding people?
Talking about how often this whole idea of collection development and the idea of the books that are being given a remit by a collector or institution to, you know,
go out and do it for me.
It's very rare now, isn't it?
Well, in my experience, it is.
I think it may, for a bit, for a bit, for a bit, for a bit, for a bit, for a bit, for a bit, for a bit, for a bit, for a bit, for a bit, for a bit, for a bit, for a bit, for a bit, for a bit, for a bit, for a bit, for a bit, for a bit, for a bit, for a bit, for a bit, for a bit,
I don't even know if we picked that up.
That sounded pretty interesting.
Who is this gentleman?
Okay, bye.
Well, he's a great old seller.
He really is.
Interesting how he moved his operation here, isn't it?
Yeah, I mean, he's sort of Slovenian, but I'm sure he'll be successful.
But it's a very rare combination of proper, at least quasi-academic intelligence and education and the sort of entrepreneurial instinct.
Very, very rare.
I mean, it's a perfect combination for a bookseller.
Someone who gambles as well as reads and understands.
There are any number of booksellers who are good salesmen, good dealmakers, but they might as well be selling fridges.
and there are any number of booksellers who are great academically understand the stuff, love it, but couldn't make a deal as it were.
There's a great episode in a film called The Harder They Come, which is set in the reggae music industry in business in Jamaica, and the central character is trying to sell his record to the radio station.
explaining that they've got a tie-in with a big producer and they can't play anything that doesn't come from Mr. Big.
And the great line there is, well, that's show business, no business, no show.
And so it's all very well having a great understanding of the book business, but if you can't actually make a spot and pursue a deal, then that's no use.
And that speaks from a few people who can combine those two.
Do you find that
I was just reading on the flight over this new little book, like, you know, Rostenberg, you're on the .
They've got a 50-year memoir published in June.
And I was charmed by, you know, the great discoveries they may have, you know, .
But maybe this connection, this might have been a little bit built in .
You know, if you find this kind of discovery at all happening
Oh yeah, all the time, all the time.
And I think it's the... If this were to be a hostile interview, and someone were to accuse me, say that all collecting is based on greed, it is retentive accumulation of stuff for its own sake, I'd say that there's no one within it.
However, the...
However much you argue about the fundamentals of collecting, the fact is that sometimes almost incidentally, although for the most part it is deliberate, it is what pertains the staff of culture, and it's one of the most important cultural expressions.
The fact that people like owning things, the fact that people look after things, often just for the sake of looking after them,
means that they get preserved and we've often found important books which have been looked after well by people who've got no idea of what they are and have looked after it because one looks after things and because they like having things around them and it's that almost accidental preservation of culture which book collecting can do that
Accidental or incidental?
Well, books are wonderfully passive things, and you can ignore a book for several hundred years.
I mean, many books haven't been read for several hundred years, and yet the book still has this power to change your life.
All you've got to do is open it, and it's there.
They're the most undemonstrative of objects.
A painting is there, and it sort of shouts itself or whispers itself.
It's visible.
You can't sort of avoid it when it's playing, but we'll just sit there and be quite happy being ignored for a hundred years or more.
It's like an unarmed weapon.
As soon as you open it, it's armed, and then it's got a plan to change your life.
Do you find that, you mentioned 700 years, of course, our history in the United States doesn't even approach that, but do you find, and of course that's quite a large figure, do you find families in the States
Where books have been preserved, incidentally.
Oh, yeah.
And then what happens?
Do they decide at some point, well, maybe it's time to give them a new life?
How is it that they come into your worldview?
Well, it's a question of generations, isn't it?
And the sort of old cliché is that, you know, it clogs the clogs in three generations.
And often it's the first generation that makes the money, the second generation spends the money.
and the third generation lives on what the second generation bought.
Yeah, yeah, absolutely.
And so it's often the... Often collections are kept together sentimentally by the children of the collectors.
By the time it gets down to grandchildren, usually there's not much direct connection and they will sell.
You can't often find children who will almost religiously maintain a collection that their parents did, as a memorial to them.
without really knowing what the collection is, probably, sometimes?
Without knowing the intensity that the person who made the collection did.
It's a much more passive relationship, and a proper collection is a growing thing, and once the collection stops and is complete, that's what goes back.
Never did library catalogues discuss this, because as soon as the catalogues finished and printed, that's it, end of collection, no more buying.
Do you find that the sources generally do come from private?
Directly, it's a small percentage.
Indirectly, most of it is the deaccessioning trend is going to increase over the years.
Yeah, it's balanced.
It's basically balanced, isn't it?
Because so much of it is rather redundant or duplicated or just unused that just by the law of economics and sort of ebb and flow of things, they will begin to come out.
I mean, as they are.
There have been many high profiles.
deaccessions and much more than what's going on at the time.
I think this is... I missed that while the... The panel, yeah, but we're used to... The key sentence.
Were you talking about deaccessions from institutions?
Yeah, yeah.
So that is happening here with some greater frequency?
Well, yeah, yeah, everywhere.
I think here and in the States.
It's happening.
We're looking at this in the States.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
It's something which is often very badly handled because of the embarrassment of the Liberians
of overselling requests and things.
That's what's often.
Can you think of any examples here?
Notable examples where there's been accession?
I don't think the British Library has any accession.
No, not meaningfully.
Are you finding that the institution just
are doing more computerized stuff, but they're casting a sharper eye towards... Yeah, yeah, yeah, absolutely.
And we're finding an attitude that, in many cases, who reads books?
Who reads printed books?
Yeah, yeah, yeah, sure.
Are you running into that?
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
People telling you that.
Yeah, yeah.
I mean, this is something which affects the world of...
The reference book, much more than the world of the rare book, the collector's book, the sort of cultural icon.
I mean, books are bought for two reasons.
One is for the information, and the other one is the cultural icon.
You've already got a paperback of Ulysses, but you actually want the real thing, because it's an atmospheric symbol of the way the book was published, and it's an important relic.
It's a cultural relic.
And I'm sure the market in books for information rather than books as objects of inspiration is changing.
You've only got to look at the market in academic reprints, academic journals and things, which has been sort of more or less destroyed, first of all by a piece and now by sort of CD-ROMs, and then by the internet, to realize that the electronic medium is now the medium of choice, those sort of things.
And that doesn't bother me at all.
I mean, we're much happier using book auction records on CD-ROM.
I'm happier calling into the British Library to consult their catalogue over the internet than I am having to trundle downstairs using this absurd micro-print edition and you never really know where to look for something or where to bounce about in it.
And so the replacement of the reference book by electronic media I think is great.
But the OED, for instance, absolutely belongs on
the DMV, all these things.
I mean, they are sort of unambiguously good.
I was thinking the other day about, just last night in fact, talking to someone about the positive things that have come out of the information revolution, as it were, and the negative things.
We've got too much information.
increase the pressure on people individually, but the unambiguously positive things are the kind of better access, better communication, better access to reference books.
Well, the question is, what's the difference between information and knowledge?
Information really doesn't, it's data.
Zero within one.
But you have found that some institutions are calling you and saying, you know,
No, because that's not particularly delting, you see, the sort of, the reference book, the... Yeah, it's at the collector's end of the market where we are dealing as much with
what you might call the cultural relic, the cultural icon, as much as with the text of the theme.
We are not at all worried about the relative, the partial redundancy of the printed page which is happening because it only reinforces the beauty and wonder of the book and the more
people spend their days reading things on computer screens, the more they want to read a proper book on the way home, and the more they realise the inherent qualities of the book.
Also, incidentally, the more antique the notion of the book becomes, it's quite likely the more collectible it will become.
Do you find any interest in rare books as long as it's ever been?
I think so, yeah.
I think so.
I mean, no two booksellers would agree.
And half the booksellers will complain about a complaint that all their collectors are getting old, there aren't any young collectors involved in it, that it's a dying pursuit.
And then other people, myself included, my best customers,
what is young obviously changes as you grow older.
You say most of your collectors are younger?
My best collectors, I can't think of many of them who are much over 50.
Certainly not old people, certainly not by today's standards.
If you're busy making your fortune in the 30s, you haven't got the money to spend it on.
on the organization.
Secondly, you put it in at the time.
So there's an element of it being a pursuit which gets a certain amount of time and a certain amount of money to pursue.
At least collectors who generally start with you, or do they more or less live up to you?
Whenever I try and generalize about that, I always end up talking completely.
But you must have a sense of, you know, a novice collector or somebody with less terminology.
Yeah, we like to think that we can, you know, because we don't just carry expensive books, we carry, you know, novice books as well.
We like to think that we can sell books to the novice and the tyro, and explain the internet from the beginning.
And it's often, as I heard Manning yesterday, obviously only really just, was just beginning to get interested in sort of, you know, collecting books as objects.
the sense of enthusiasm and the genuine affection for these things.
It was a great pleasure showing him around the store.
And I'm talking about the ins and outs of it.
It didn't bother me at all that he didn't buy anything.
You mentioned that you have modest books.
Could you give me a sense of your range?
Oh, pound zero to, you know, a couple of million.
Give me an example of a couple of million.
Well, we can sell you a collection of books on the Gulf now for, I think it's about two or three million pounds.
On the Middle East, which is worth a couple of million, we think.
I just sold an archive this week for 100,000.
We, you know, many colour plate books are worth, they're really worth five and six figures.
I mean, they've basically sold the private collection.
The examples I just mentioned, in fact, the collection of books on the Middle East and the archive.
The archive which is sold has gone to an institution, which is the main market for archives.
And the Middle East collection hasn't been sold in its life yet.
to go to an institution.
It would be the core of a very useful, small university library.
In the United States, we still have new institutions being established as we speak.
There's an institution out in California, Monterey, opened up within the last five years.
They didn't even have a library in the plants.
Did you hear about this?
No, really.
They got a lot of criticism, so they thought, all right, we'll have a library.
The whole press, the whole intention was to have an electronic resource.
What name was the press?
It was part of the California State System.
It was in Monterey at the former Fort Worth.
California State University of Monterey campus, I guess.
But then on the other hand, you'll find some new institutions that are opening, and they need books desperately.
I was talking to one bookseller, he's brought in 80,000 books.
They just want books.
It is almost paradoxical on the one hand when you see institutions, the accessioning books.
The measure of a great institution, on the other hand, is how many books do you have?
Yeah.
You know, my friend Gregoria was leaving Brown to go to the Carnegie Corporation.
I just didn't even know him last week.
You know, one of his great triumphs over the last nine years is to have increased the Brown collections from two million to three million books in nine years.
Yeah.
And then we got some other decisions where we've got water go down.
I want to now leave in six million, let's say.
But do you find that that the badge of respect still is in the number of titles that you have?
About 12.
I mean numbers are meaningless.
You want to buy a million books, I'll get you a million books.
It won't cost you a million dollars even.
The book is such a powerful object and people
It still is a mighty thing.
And so the idea of X million books is, I suppose, a great landmarks.
It helps publicize the institution, but most of our institutional customers are much more concerned with the quality of what they've got and the educational value.
Can you think of any, again, to go back to what I mentioned earlier, how this book really does hope to give some sense
of continental collecting.
Can you think of some collectors?
We've got problems of confidentiality here.
I understand.
And to cut to a question five or ten minutes further on.
We'll turn the thing off if you want.
The big difference, the psychological difference between the picture collector, or the furniture collector, and the book collector is in the nature of the relationship between the object
Stick a picture on the wall, it's one to many.
A piece of furniture there is one to many.
It is a public statement of stuff.
A book is an essentially private thing.
Only one person can do it at a time.
They can read it at a time, for the most part.
And this is...
This is why booksellers are always seduced by the idea of exhibiting in antique fairs and selling into the picture market because they know what good valued books are, you know, as cultural objects.
They're far better valued than paintings.
But over and over again you realise that it doesn't work, that this great arbitrage really isn't there.
And the psychological motivation behind collecting paintings and behind collecting books can be completely different.
I mean, it's worlds apart.
And almost every book collector will tell you about the disappointment he felt in the early stages of his collection when he realised that none of his friends and colleagues
had a clue what he was talking about.
And you describe to them some wonderful book you just bought, and you see their eyes glaze over straight away.
Whereas you show them your Rembrandt or your Van Gogh, and they may be completely colorblind and visually illiterate, but they know that it cost you five million dollars.
Well, again, without being specific, one thing I do want to try and illustrate is, remember, if you know this book,
is the significance of the great private library at this particular point in history at this time.
And what a wonderful opportunity it would be.
And this is a totally positive, forward-looking, and how it's, you know, the work of a man like Mr. Gaines's stature, who has a perception and an interest
to build this, working with this firm to see it happen, and look what you have.
We'll be there, you know.
Absolutely.
And that's basically .
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
And if it's, you know, as we chat out loud, you know, if in fact,
he was misrepresented in this book.
I did this in my other book.
I mean, if- No, he wasn't- When I perceived wrongs to have been done, I was more than happy to.
to set it right in print.
The subtle point there was not that he was misrepresented, but the point I was trying to make with it is not that he doesn't want to talk to you when he spoke to the people about the decorating book.
He didn't know he was speaking to the people about the decorating book.
They were his comments, but they were obtained not exactly by deception, but unknowingly by Brian, as it were.
Well, it is, you know, I mean, all I can do is... I would never, I mean, there's a tape recorder right in front of you, you know, you see it.
Yeah, yeah.
You are transparently and honest, and a sympathetic commentator.
And I... I mean, you know why I'm here.
I mean, I made this survey.
This is...
This is not my call, and it is also not mutable.
So I won't be seeing Brian at all today, is that right?
How about John?
John's back, yeah.
Is there a sixth generation?
I've got a ten-year-old son who's going to be at the moment.
He's not a footballer, ballet dancer or something, I think.
I want to say it's going to be a ballet dancer.
There's a lot of pressure on that tenure when you think about it.
Well, it's only a matter of sort of, not exactly chance, but, you know, can't claim any inherent virtue in having, you know, found this a congenial place to work and wouldn't be at least disappointed if my son didn't find it a congenial place to work.
You know, it's... Ben.
Ben Benjamin?
Yeah.
Do you bring him in?
Yeah, he comes in all the time.
Well, not all the time.
Do you have books in the house?
Oh yes, full of books.
I'm switching the subject entirely now, as you can see.
I'd like to apologise, by the way, for the disappointing year.
Do you have a question?
Oh yeah, he's actually much more the collector than either of his parents.
I mean, books, you know, cards.
little toys and things.
He likes accumulating things.
And he gets mad with me when I sell things.
Absolutely mad.
Because my hobby, one of the things I most like doing is going around junk shops at the weekends or whenever I can.
It's the greatest of pressures.
It's like fishing, continual renewal of hope over experience.
Do you ever fish?
the fisherman knows only too well the feeling of having done a blank day and very disappointing but you know that next week your hope will triumph over your experience and you will be there and as you go down you will have visions you anything can happen you know in the world record
Big fish!
And it's exactly the same thrill that comes from hunting for stuff.
So when I buy stuff at the weekends, and if I find something good, and then decide to sell it, he gives me terrible grief.
I'm afraid he's a proper collector accumulator, won't let us get rid of anything.
So I have to do it on the side, and then six miles later he'll say, damn, where's that?
I've sold it, son.
How come you...
At what point did you, how old did you start?
I'm 38 I think.
So did you train or educate yourself with the idea that you'd enter there?
No, I was pretty much, as an adolescent I didn't much want to do it because it seemed like too soft an option.
And so I tried and failed in various other enterprises and ended up here accidentally.
More or less accidentally, needed a job and sort of helped out in the packing department or something and never left.
And I found it extraordinarily congenial.
It's a wonderful world for the generalist to be in and for people who enjoy meeting people.
People who enjoy meeting people.
The profile of the bookseller is quite interesting.
Very few of them made a conscious decision at the beginning that this was what they wanted to do.
the book collector who needs more and the person who, you know, from a very young age been passionate about books as objects.
But for the most part we'd drift into it from different areas.
Do you own a fashion for the books yourself?
Yeah, at times.
Do you get a feeling, an indefinable, an expressible feeling when you come upon something really exquisite?
Yeah, I get excited.
I love books.
Part of it, it's difficult to disentangle the thrill of acquisition from the inherent virtues of the object.
And also when you're in business, the business side of it clouds the picture even further.
No, they are the most extraordinary objects.
There's no cultural object in the world to match it.
Name it, whatever it is, name a human emotion, name a human activity, you can express that in a book collection.
Or you can help understand it in a book collection.
Love, war, death.
This book will be coming out in two years, so just tell me what the date of your birthday is.
20th November, 58th.
So you'll be 20... You'll probably be 40 on this book.
Yeah.
Can you think of anything you'd like to ask?
Well, they are extraordinary objects.
Could we...
Yeah, yeah, sure.
I'm delighted to.
Interesting.
In the old days?
In the old days, because you were dealing in many more books, the whole way of dealing in books is different.
It's all much more intense.
It's much more exact.
You can't get away with perfecting books.
the way that you used to.
I mean, if you read the version back with Tom Jones, what was the great fielding story, you know, the made-up.
People used to make books up much more in the 1920s and 30s than they do now.
But how does that make them?
No, complete a book.
If you've got a partial book, you take leaves from other copy and stick it in.
Oh, I see.
Okay, I'm sure.
Nowadays people are much keener on the idea of virginity, the whole thrust of, indeed the whole point of book collecting is to get the book in its original condition, in the idea that you will get closer to the state of creation and publication and you will feel more in contact with the time.
And so in the 20s, not only were we dealing with a greater volume of books, but we spent more time
playing around with them, putting leaves in from one copy to another, and so on.
And so every big bookseller would have had a room like this, where they would, you know, you buy a book, even a rare book.
This is very interesting.
I mean, what's this?
It's back in a Mundi 1635, and it lacks the last leaf of the table, and the first leaf of the dedication.
Page three's been repaired, and page five is defective.
Nowadays, this would be perfectly, well, quite stable, as is.
Back then, it wouldn't have been, and so we would have kept it waiting to get a copy which maybe had other defects, from which we could nick the back page.
So this is called the O-D-D-M-E-N-T.
O-D-M-E-N-T.
Room.
And this is basically...
This has been accumulating over... These are books which weren't considered... Over the decades.
...of saleable quality, of merchantable quality.
So page 3, 4, 5 is defective on this, otherwise perfectly... These are saleable books, but not of saleable quality.
Is that a fair?
Well, they are... Desirable books, but... Yeah, yeah, yeah.
I mean, looking at them, some of them are...
Some of them are books which may at one time have been saleable, but nowadays aren't particularly, because fashions do change.
In other lines of work, this might be called, you know, a place where you keep the spare parts.
Yeah.
Yeah, absolutely so.
Absolutely so.
I mean, like breaking an old Ferrari or something.
And so this was stuck up here for the fame.
Well, this is a very interesting book.
Look at this.
This is what the 7th, 18th century.
Yeah.
That's been cut.
Look at that.
Now, who did that, do you think?
No idea.
It doesn't look accidental.
It looks too neat for that.
You were saying earlier, these are probably books that came in along with large lots that you purchased.
You said about a truckload, which you were
specifically buying for particular rarities, but this more or less came along with the... Pretty much, pretty much.
And when you buy whole libraries and also sometimes you buy things and then you find out on collation that they're defective and you return them.
And this cost is one pound in Hodgson's in 1946.
So that's been in here for 51 years.
Yeah.
Yeah, a couple other titles if you get them.
I just read them out.
This is a rather dull edition of
of Catelyn, in that they're not coloured.
But look, it still has illustrations in there.
Yeah, and it's in here because two or three of the plates are loose, and it's lacking the errata slip.
But Catelyn is still... That book is probably saleable in its present condition.
Yeah, it probably is, but we're very happy doing this.
...a sort of a lost aspect of the time being.
So is there a phrase, is there a Meg's standard, a Meg's?
What you're suggesting to me is that while others might list that book or offer it, you won't.
Well, it's more complicated than that.
We're partly talking about change in the book trailer for the last 40 or 50 years under contradictory trends going on.
Stories are never linear.
They can't be.
I mean, life just isn't like that.
And so on the one hand, we've got books becoming rarer, and so people, a book which one time would have been considered unsaleable because it lacks an errata leaf, nowadays, when there hasn't been another copy in the market for five years, well, people sort of have to buy what they want, and their standards have had to go down.
On the other hand, people are more rigorous about the description of the book, and so it is much more frowned upon to perfect a copy.
You see, if you look at Dickens in Parts, it's a great example, you know, the monthly issues of Dickens, which was hugely popular as they were collecting in the 1920s.
And there was a wholesale industry in fabricating these.
The bibliographer had his idea of what the perfect pickwick in Parts was, and he should have this advert, that advert, and the other advert.
And maybe one or two copies existed in their natural state, which had all the adverts they should have in the right order.
But once he had decreed that that was the correct one, then all the booksellers, with the tacit support of the collectors, I mean, it wasn't a particularly deceptive thing to do.
They went around taking adverts from other copies, other books, and shoving them and playing around with them.
Whereas nowadays, the easiest Dickens in parts to sell would be one with one owner provenance, original condition, not restored, not knocked about with,
because it was recognized for our generations.
The present generation is always convinced that it is unambiguously right, and it's not a relative judgment, but it does seem to me that it's, you know, if you're collecting books, the whole point of doing it is that you want it in condition as issued, you know, because it gets you closer to the... This is interesting.
What floor are we on?
This is in the Muse building.
Oh, so this is an adjoin, this is kind of like an annex we might call it.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Okay, that's good.
Excellent.
No, but this is an extraordinary archive.
It is an extraordinary archive.
Yeah, but not for sale.
Not for sale.
Quite well indexed.
It is well indexed?
Yeah, good.
So these are important books, right?
Well, there are important books among it, and there are books which have probably become more important since they were put here, and there are also books which have become less important or less salable.
depending upon current fashion, I guess.
Just for the travel department.
I'm not a travel book board, so I can't really... Well, we're looking at Cook's Voyages over there, 1772, 1775.
That's a pretty important book, as a matter of fact.
Oh, yeah.
I'm in many good bits here.
Great.
All right.
Through the Dark Continent.
It's going to be Stanley, of course, right?
Volume 1.
Illustrated.
I don't know.
And the drains here for swapping out, or whatever they call it.
And that structure up there is the hay chute.
Oh, this is a hay chute.
So one of the rough places we've been in the hay log.
And finally this all sort of tumbled down, you know, it was before hay was baled.
Where would they keep the carriages we kept in here as well?
I think the carriage next door, a little sort of garage there, and the horses in here, this would have probably been the tack room, and upstairs the officers and maids, and you probably saw a little bit of a Victorian war collector up there, which we should get from here.